---
layout: default
title: 1960 Coup
parent: Module 2
nav_order: 3
---
# 1960 Coup

> Amid growing discontent and protests, Alparslan Turkes announced on 27th May, 1960 that the arme forces were taking over the government. The brutal period ended with 4 executions, including Adnan Menderes.

* [National Unity Committe](#national-unity-committee)
* [1961 Constitution](#1961-constitution)
* [Election Law](#election-law)
* [Trial of the Old Regime](#trial-of-the-old-regime)

---

There was discontent and protests against the government. US aid from the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall plan was running out.

On **May 27, 1960**, Alparslan Turkes announced on radio that the armed forces were taking over the government.

**People who carried the coup were low-ranking soldiers. Top soldiers in the army did not know about the coup.** 

They proposed close alliances with NATO and the US. American involvement in the coup is argued. 

Army officials had a Western education aligned with NATO values.

## National Unity Committee

Army officials formed the **National Unity Committee** (Milli Birlik Komitesi) headed by **Cemal Gursel**. It contained 38 officers.

Cemal Gursel was a senior soldier with no involvement leading to the coup. He was brought to Ankara from Izmir. He is chosen the PM, and minister of defence. *This gives the message that this is not simply a change of government.*

A law professor (Siddik Sami Onar) prepared a report justifying the acts of the army.

There are two factions in the NUC:
1. People like Cemal Gursel propose to create a plan and transfer the power back to the people.
2. Alparslan Turkes' group says they cannot trust civilians. Menderes and others should learn their lesson.

On November 13, 1960, Cemal Gursel announces that NUC was disbanded and a new committe was founded.
> 14 radicals, including Alparlan Turkes' group, were excluded. They were sent to various countries as military ateches. (Turkes -> India)

## 1961 Constitution

Siddik Sami Onar and his friends developed a new constitution. It stayed in effect from 1961 to 1980.

It was progressive compared to the 1982 constitution.

The 1924 constitution had a specific agenda. It provided what was needed to perform reforms. **No seperation of powers.**

The main aim of the new constitution was to prevent the occurence of a power monopoly such as DP, or CHP by counter-balancing the parliament with other institutions. **Seperation of powers should be clearly established.** Powers of executives should be limited.

They took some measures to make legislation more difficult
* A new senate was created.
* All legislation had to pass through both chambers. Parliament could overrule a senate veto with 2/3 majority. Legislation became more time-consuming as a result.
* All MGK members became members of the senate. 1/3 was elected with elections. 1/3 was selected by the president.
* A **constitutional court** was formed. It could stop any legislation it deemed unconstitutional.

The universities and the mass media were given full autonomy.

Bill of civil liberties was introduced.

**Military was given a constitutional role for the first time with the introduction of the MGK.** Civilian and military officials were together. It is led by the president. Military wanted to take a role in politics as they did not trust civilians.

## Election Law

The election law was changed as well. 

Proportional representation was introduced to lessen the chance of one party gaining large majority such as DP.

Everyone is represented according to their votes.

## Trial of the Old Regime

Democrats were arrested right after the coup and taken to Yassiada. The party was closed.

Judges made no effort to hide their distaste. They were rude against the accused.

Namik Gedik, minister of the interior, committed suicide.

People over 65 were not executed.

4 people were sentenced to death:
* Adnan Menderes
* Hasan Polatkan
* Celal Bayar (not executed)
* Fatin Rustu Zorlu


























